---
slug: welcome
title: Welcome to Osta-Lang!
authors: [ johan ]
tags: [ community ]
---

We are excited to announce the launch of Osta-Docs, the official documentation for Osta-Lang!
This platform is designed to provide comprehensive resources and tutorials to help you get started with
Osta-Lang and make the most of its features.

<!-- truncate -->

:::warning[Osta-Lang is in early development!]
Osta-Lang is currently in its early development stages, and we are actively working on improving the language and its
ecosystem. We appreciate your patience and support as we continue to enhance Osta-Lang.
:::

## What is Osta-Lang?

Osta-Lang is a modern programming language designed to be simple, efficient, and powerful. It focuses on providing a
clean syntax, strong type system, compile-time metaprogramming capabilities, and a set of features to prevent common
programming errors. Osta-Lang mainly targets low-level system programming and high-performance applications, so expect
to see features like zero-cost abstractions, manual memory management, a focus on performance, and a lot of (toggleable)
safety features.

## Getting Started
To get started with Osta-Lang, we recommend checking out the following resources:
- **[Getting Started](/docs/guides/getting-started)**: A step-by-step guide to setting up your Osta-Lang environment and writing your first program.
- **[Osta-Lang Reference](/docs/reference)**: The official reference documentation for Osta-Lang, covering syntax, semantics, and standard library features.
